hello and welcome to another walkthrough for computer architecture for everybody in this walkthrough we
are going to do some more work with our CDC 6504 emulator we're going to build our first loop so let
me go ahead and load that loop up and then turn on the assembler so we can see it oh not that one
we're going to change it that would be where we would change it let's view the assembly we just
want to be able to look at it when we're near it okay so this is not going to use any memory
so i can just kind of leave the view assembly over here actually can bring it all the way over here
because we're not going to get into the second half of the instruction memory because we're
done here so let's get a review of what we're going to do so this is kind of like a python for
the x register in range five there's going to be a loop that goes zero one two three four and then
when it hits five it's going to jump out it's not going to execute the body of the loop for the value
five as soon as it hits five as soon as it's equal to five we're going to jump out of the loop so the
first thing to note is this syntax of a label labels are not actually in the machine language
they're making it so that we don't have to put numbers in like this jump instruction or the
branch if equal instruction so we can basically say hey assembler you're pretty good at keeping
track of stuff this loop is going to turn into an address and we're going to jump to an address
which is a number or we're going to jump to an offset and please calculate the offset do all that
calculation for me so i don't have to put numbers in here so these aren't really instructions they're
kind of pseudo instructions much like the data pseudo instruction so let's take a look at how
these things end up in the machine language so let's take a look at the jump to loop that jump
to loop is the jump back up to the top and so we're sitting here at location 0x06 and that's
a jump instruction and the loop is the address which is what the program counter is going to get
set to and that's going to set the program counter to one which means it's going to jump
to instruction one and that is the compare instruction so the calculation of this number
one is done by the assembler as it looks at this loop symbol and it keeps track of it right so it
takes two two passes you can calculate it backwards jumps but forward jumps are a little bit harder now
the beq is even a little bit trickier okay because of course the beq checks the z flag if the two
last comparison was equal then the result of that subtraction would be zero and so we're going to be
eq so here's the beq at pc location 0x03 and then we take a look at the immediate so this immediate
you it's going to jump to location 8 which is the end of the program which is a break instruction
but you look at this offset and that's a three zero one one is a three and so what this is is
this is a relative offset again computed by the assembler on our behalf now it turns out that this
three is going to be added to the current program counter but it's not added to four it's actually
added to five and that's because the program counter retrieve the beq instruction then it
retrieve the immediate instruction and as a side effect it incremented the pc and so the pc once
this beq is executing is five so five plus three is eight and you'll listen as you read it it'll
it'll have computed the five plus three it'll know that this is five and it'll add three to it and
it'll know eight and so when we're narrating this execution you'll hear it talking up branching to
eight when eight is not really sitting here in the base two okay so let's go ahead and do some
steps i'll take it slow at the beginning and then we'll speed it up pc 0x00 clear x register so we
cleared the x register but again it already was zero because the program was just starting but the
pc has moved up to one the zero is set because we cleared the x register we touched the x register
we did a calculation which means we set it to zero okay and that sets the z flat the next
instruction is going to be compared to five pc 0x01 compare x register with immediate 0x05
okay now the interesting thing is that is not z because it's not equal it does a subtraction
so it takes zero minus five but it didn't store the result of that it just set the flags and so
that compare instruction doesn't change registers it just changes flags so now we're at the point
where z is not set and n is set and so the fix we're going to do is we're going to run this beq
instruction and that means if the z is set we're going to jump to end and end is three bytes beyond
location five but in this first time we're not going to jump because the z flag is not set so
let's do a step you'll see it's going to just jump over it to location five pc 0x03 branch if equal
address 0x08 so you notice it calculated the five plus three equals eight but because the z flag is
not set it just went to pc five and didn't touch the pc so you can always think of a branch or a
jump as like a setting of the pc value but in this case it computed a relative offset of the current
pc which was five plus three and that would have been where we jumped so the next thing we're going
to do after we didn't jump is we're going to increment x pc 0x05 increment x register so now
x is one it's not negative and it's not zero and the next thing we're going to do is we're going to
jump back up to location one so this is an absolute jump to location one whereas the branch eq was a
positive offset jump pc 0x06 jump to address one so we're back at one you see the pc is one
and now the next thing we're doing is going to do the comparison pc 0x01 compare x register
with immediate 0x05 now one is less than five so we get the end flag so we're not going to file this
branch pc 0x03 branch if equal address 0x08 didn't branch now we're going to increment pc 0x05
increment x register and now we're going to do an absolute jump like a go-to pc 0x06 jump to address
one so you let's let's go ahead and just run it for a while we'll wait maybe i'll try to stop it
when x is three and then see what's going on so let's just run it pc 0x01 compare x register with
immediate 0x05 pc 0x03 branch if equal address 0x08 pc 0x05 increment x register pc 0x06 jump
to address one pc 0x01 compare x register with immediate 0x05 pc 0x03 branch if equal address 0x08
pc 0x05 increment x register pc 0x06 jump to address one piece okay so now we are jumped to
address one i got i caught it halfway through it okay did the compare and it fell through still
because it's not equal and next time we're coming up x is going to be five so i'm going to start
stepping at this point uh we're going to i think this is uh oh no it's we i stopped it before the
beq okay so it's still negative because we checked to see if four was less than five and it is so that
the n is still so we're going to branch pc 0x03 branch if equal address 0x08 do one more this is
going to be the increment pc 0x05 increment x register now we're going to do an absolute
jump back up to the top of the loop pc 0x06 jump to address one okay here we are so look x is now
five this is a top tested loop the next thing we're going to do is we're going to compare it
and watch the little z flag happy little z flag turn on one step pc 0x01 compare x register with
immediate 0x05 there we go so the z register is now set and the beq is going to read the z
z flag actually not register i think them is like one bit registers okay and so the beq is going to
jump and remember it's going to take this three one one and add it to five and jump to eight so
let's party pc 0x03 branch if equal address 0x08 and now we're at x08 0x08 break no printed output
so there's no printed output because we didn't store anything in the memory we are just showing
you how loops work okay so i hope this has been helpful in a simple loop so this is both a loop
and an if test and then we're going to do a couple more that get a little bit more complicated so i
hope you found this useful